the chief executive of the Health and
Safety Executive today I'd like to
update you on our continuing work to
reopen our country's economy and I know
this matters greatly to everyone but
before I do so I want to take you
through the latest daily coronavirus
data slides could we have the first
slide please
the first slide shows cases confirmed
with a test five million eight hundred
seventy thousand and five hundred six
tests for coronavirus have now been
carried out or posted in the UK this
includes one hundred and two thousand
nine and thirty tests carried out or
posted yesterday two hundred and eighty
nine thousand one hundred and forty
people have tested positive an increase
of one thousand three hundred eighty
seven cases since yesterday the graph
shows a steadily falling number of
identified cases on a seven day rolling
average despite the increase in testing
you had the second slide please the
second slide shows the latest data from
hospitals four hundred and forty six
people were admitted to hospital with
corona virus and England Wales and
Northern Ireland on the sixth of June
down from six hundred and twenty-four a
week ago and down from a peak of 3431 on
the first of April
five hundred thirteen the corona virus
patients are currently in mechanical
ventilation beds in the UK down from six
hundred and fifty three a week ago and
down from a peak of 3301 on the 12th of
April the third slide please the third
slide shows what is happening in
hospitals across the country there are
now six thousand three hundred forty
eight people in hospitals with
coronavirus in the UK down 17 percent
from seven hundred and seven thousand
622 a week ago and down from a peak of
twenty thousand six hundred ninety eight
on the 12th of April as the graphs show
while there is some variation most
nations and regions of the UK are
broadly following a similar pattern
our fourth slide please the fourth slide
shows the daily figures for those who
have sadly lost their lives after
testing positive for coronavirus across
all settings the total number of deaths
now stands at forty thousand eight
hundred and eighty-three that's an
increase of two hundred eighty six
fatalities since yesterday when measured
by a seven-day rolling average the daily
number of deaths currently stands at 216
down from a peak of 943 on the 14th of
April and the fifth light please the
fifth slide shows the deaths where
coronavirus was confirmed or suspected
reported by the Office for National
Statistics these figures take slightly
longer to compile than the daily figures
as they're drawn from death certificates
they include not just deaths confirmed
by the positive test for kovin but also
those confirmed by a doctor without a
test and those where covert 19:00 was
suspected but not confirmed the first
chart shows that up to the 29th of May
the ONS reported a total of 50,000 or
107 deaths in the UK where kovat 19:00
was mentioned on the death certificate
this compares to the figure of 38,000 5
from 93 deaths
confirmed with a positive test
previously reported by the Department of
Health and Social Care over the same
period the second chart shows deaths by
place of occurrence since the start of
the outbreak 62 percent of registered
kovat 19 deaths have occurred in
hospitals and 31 percent have occurred
in care homes at the start of this
crisis we took the necessary steps of
closing vast numbers of shops all that
those we regarded as essential to try
and stop the spread of korean virus and
protect the public that was the right
decision even though there is no
escaping the hardships it would have
caused for businesses and their staff to
support those workers and businesses we
put in place and unpress
package of support including small
business grants loans to job retention
scheme and the self-employed scheme now
thanks to the efforts of the British
people in following social distancing
rules we have succeeded in reducing the
number of infections and getting the our
rate under control that is why we can
carefully begin to open parts the
economy which were required to be closed
in a phased and careful manner on the
1st of June we allowed car showrooms and
outdoor markets to open thanks the
ongoing enormous efforts of people
across the country we continue to meet
the five tests set out in the prime
minister's roadmap and the r8 continues
to stay below one so I can confirm today
that retail outlets which have been
required to be closed will be able to
open their doors again from Monday the
15th of June so long as they comply with
a covert secure guidelines we published
on the 25th of May this is the latest
step in the careful restarting of our
economy and will enable high streets up
and down the country to spring back to
life of course many shops have remained
open throughout the pandemic ensuring
that we're able to buy the essentials we
need and I would like to thank those
workers at supermarkets at pharmacies at
post offices and other essential
retailers for their dedication during
this period many of these businesses
rapidly adapted to introduce social
distancing early on including special
opening hours for vulnerable people
perspex screens at checkouts floor
markings to guide shoppers and limiting
the number of customers allowed inside a
store at one time in the new normal we
have all got used to shopping with
social distancing now is the right time
to apply these principles more widely to
more shops as we continue our cautious
reopening of the economy to support this
on the 25th of May my department
published updated covert secure
for working guidance for people who work
in or run shops or branches in the
retail sector this has given retail
businesses enough time to make sure
their premises are curved it secure and
this will allow workers to return safely
back to stores and welcome back shoppers
on Monday this guidance was developed in
close consultation with both national
and independent retailers business
representative groups trade unions
public health England and the Health and
Safety Executive shops should reopen
once they're able to follow the curve in
19 secure guidelines giving confidence
to both the staff and customers that
they are opening safely this means any
business that is open must complete a
curve in 1968 the necessary steps to
manage those risks as is their legal
obligation as part of the guidance we
have provided a notice that businesses
should visibly display in their shop
window or outside their door to show
their customers they have read and taken
steps to follow the guidance if a shop
reopens without putting in place
responsible steps to reduce a
transmission of the virus we can take a
range of actions including issuing
enforcement notices local authorities
and the Health and Safety Executive
regularly carry out checks and respond
to concerns from the public regarding
risks in the workplace but of course
there are businesses which still remain
closed as soon as we can we will publish
further safer working guidance for
restaurants pubs and bars as well as
hairdressers barbers nail bars and
related services these documents will
provide practical steps to allow those
businesses to reopen in a manner that is
as safe as possible for workers and
their customers I know there's been a
lot of speculation about when we might
be able to reopen these parts of the
economy when I completely understand why
we're all so keen to get them back up
and running and I Absolution thews II
Azzam
but we continue to follow the roadmap
which sets out our ambition to reopen
these sectors from the fourth of July at
the earliest in the meantime we will
continue to protect livelihoods and
support businesses so that our ready to
bounce back and play their part in the
economic recovery and as we consider
measures needed to support our economic
bounce-back we will be redoubling our
efforts to listen to and work with the
business community we want to build an
economy which is fairer greener or
dynamic more innovative and which
attracts investment from all over the
world so starting this week I am leading
five new recovery roundtables bringing
together businesses and business
representative groups and leading
academics they will consider measures to
support economic recovery and ensure we
have the right skills and opportunities
in place for our workforce these
sessions will feed directly into the
government's work on economic recovery
and we will help deliver the commitments
we made through British people only last
December these now take on an even
greater sense of urgency and importance
because whilst we have a laser-like
focus on the immediate public health
challenge in front of us we recognize
our debt to businesses which have played
such a vital role in combating
coronavirus and keeping our economy
moving and we will work shoulder to
shoulder with our businesses as we get
ready for our economic fight back right
we'll now move to questions from the
public
so can hear the first question from
Alison from London at the moment people
can go on day trips to exercise or meet
family following social distancing rules
but when can people and families bulk UK
holidays and stay overnight for example
self-catering camping and cottage hire
Alison thank you for your question and I
do understand why people want to have
answer those questions
but what I've said and what the
government said all along is that we
want to do
and opening up the economy in a phased
manner in a careful manner and that's
what we have done on the first of June
we we reopened parts of the economy
we're now saying for other retail they
will be open to able to open from the
15th of June but of course it's really
important that we continue to support
the sort of businesses that Allison has
talked about so we have the furless
scheme in place we have the grand scheme
in place and we will continue to support
our businesses the next question is a
written question from hunt C from
Manchester
understandably in various government
support packages for existing businesses
during the UK lockdown as we start to
ease out of lockdown the economic
recovery is going to be vital in helping
life returned to normal
with this in mind well the government
commit to supporting new innovative
startups in the coming months Hansie
thank you for that that's a very good
question as you will know the the
Chancellor announced a 1.25 billion
pound package and as part of that we
also had the the Future Fund and we were
making further announcements in terms of
how we get the economy going in terms of
these green innovative firms and as I
said I'm going to be leading a a set of
conversations with business with
academics over the next few days of the
next few weeks and we want to get
precisely those answers because we do
want a dynamic economy a green economy
and we want to make sure that it is also
inclusive I think we now move to
questions from the media so the first
question is from Vicki young at the BBC
Vicki many businesses including pubs and
restaurants say that the 2 meter rule
means that this is impossible for them
to make a profit now the World Health
Organization recommends one meter have
you been arguing for that to change
Vicki I what I would say to you is that
the 2 meter rule is currently in place
we of course take advice from our
scientists from from Sage and
of course you know when it is safe to do
so we will see whether you can move to a
shorter distance but ultimately we keep
all of these things under review you
know you've made the point that there
are you know other countries in the
world that have moved from two meters to
closer distances of course they are
further along in terms of their roadmap
in terms of opening up businesses but I
said we keep these matters under review
how soon could that happen in your
opinion well I can't answer that a
question what we are doing is opening up
the economy in a really sort of phased
manner I think that's the right approach
we're taking a cautious view on this
because frankly the last thing we want
you know I have conversations on a daily
basis with businesses Viki and what they
will recognize is the worst possible
thing that could happen is that we have
a second peak we lose all the gains that
we have gone so far and that would set
that confidence in the country but also
in the business community as well we
don't want that to happen but I
completely understand why for economic
reasons that businesses will want to to
have a look at this 2 meter rule as I
said with all of these matters we keep
this under review thank you very much
for your questions
can we move to drill hills from ITV yeah
good afternoon
minister hello everyone and I'm going to
continue the same theme because you
actually promised a review on the social
distancing rule in good time the prime
minister said for the reopening of shops
on the 15th of June so what is the
result of that review will it be reduced
well Joel as I said we are at 2 metres
the 2 metres stays in place for the
moment but you know as I've also made
very clear the promises made clear we
keep all of these things under review
and I do get why businesses in in a
whole range of sectors make the economic
case why you would want to move closer
than than 2 metres but ultimately this
is about what is safe and I said you
know we will keep this on
review and we will only make changes
when it is safe to do so so a follow-on
case Minister because they don't
understand the rationale of two meters
in the UK it's one of them half meters
in Germany a country which has done
rather well at getting on top of this
virus in the World Health Organization
rules oh one metre and pubs and
restaurants are warning that they will
be barely profitable at 1 meter social
distancing at 2 meters a million jobs
will be lost Minister has government
privately decided that actually job
losses on that sort of scale are
unfortunately inevitable and if you have
would it not be advisable to say so
publicly well Joel as I said you know we
do keep this issue under review and we
will continue to do so and I said we
will only change it when we think it is
safe to do so you know ultimately this
is sadly whether Joel is asking a
question or an outcome are you promised
an outcome by the 15th of June the prime
minister gave that undertaken at the
liaison committee a couple of weeks back
so where is the outcome of the review
what is the government decided and can
you explain your reasoning please yes
well let me explain the reasoning so as
I said we are we aren't keeping this
matter under review and frankly you know
I can I completely understand
the commercial rationales rationale for
this I mean there's business sector II
you know these are conversations that I
have on a daily basis with with
businesses but this is about keeping
people safe and you talked about in a
support for businesses there is a huge
range of support that we have made
available for businesses you know if you
compare an international basis it's
really incredibly favourable I
understand just one last question yes
you're not going to be publishing the
advice in good time in June so can you
now commit to us and give us another
deadline when will the government
publish its the view of the 2 metre
social distancing rule we've also
promised to publish the advice it hasn't
yet been published when will it be
published what I will give you a
commitment
that we will keep this under review and
it will only change when it is safe to
do so thank you very much the next
question is from Victoria McDonald at
channel 4 Victoria thank you mr. Sharma
on an entirely different subject last
week a report from public health England
was published which we hoped would shed
some light on - why people from black
Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds
seemed to be disproportionately affected
by covert nineteen part of that report
was missing this was the community
engagement section which had had
thousands of contributions and we've
spoken to some of those contributors who
are actually dismayed that it hasn't
been published so can you tell me why
was this missing who decided not to
publish it and can you guarantee that
this section of this report will be
published well Victoria I think the the
report was published it was
comprehensive it had a set of
conclusions in it and one of the
conclusions in terms of the the the
disparities issue was around people from
black and Asian multi-ethnic groups are
at higher risk than the white groups it
also made the point that actually the
key determinants of risk is age so it
did say that you know if you are over 80
80 or over you're 70 times more likely
to be at risk than someone under 40 it
also made the point that men are two
times at higher risk than women and it
made a sort of commentary on the fact
that those who are in difficult even
deprived areas unfortunately are at
higher risk as well it also went on to
talk about core morbidities as well so
it was a pretty comprehensive report and
as you know the equalities minister cami
bay de NOC is going to be taking this
work forward the terms of reference of
that work have been published and of
course we will look at any policy
changes that that come out of this most
of that was already known so the the bit
I was specifically referring to was the
community engagements part of this which
was we were led to believe led by
Professor Kevin Fenton and
that's the bit that is missing and that
is the bit that it has dismayed the many
contributors well what I say I think the
report is is very comprehensive and
there is work which is being taken
forward by camy bait knock in a follow
up to this you know the terms of
reference are available there they're
public and of course I think the key
thing here is to make sure that that
where we learn that there are changes
that need to be made in terms of policy
then of course we would look to do that
thank you very much for that Victoria at
Frances Elliot from The Times Frances
business secretary um you gave
non-central shops three weeks notice
from the cove insecure guidelines can
you commit to giving restaurants and
other hospitality sectors at least three
weeks notice which I think bushes are
pretty much imminently for the July the
fourth deadline and secondly professor
Chris which he said last week that the 2
meter rule would stay until the end of
the epidemic that's what he said last
week was he wrong and you've said
repeatedly that you you will lift it
when it's safe is that a question of
numbers of infections or the our number
which so I think in terms of publication
I can tell you that we are having
consultation right now in terms of this
this further safer working guidance that
work is is ongoing and you know we will
make sure that we publish it ahead of
time as is important for businesses to
be able to prepare I completely
understand that in terms of the are fact
I go back to the question at the answers
I gave earlier which is that we will
continue to keep this under review and
of course this will depend on safety
considerations as so not the R factor
the the the distance the 2 meter
distance and we will of course keep this
under review and we will only make
changes if it's safe to do so is there a
follow up
yes there is afraid mr. Sharma because
people will really want to know against
which metrics you're going to make that
judgment I'm just saying when it's safe
to do so is in tension with the chief
medical officer who says he wants it
until the very end of the epidemic
ultimately this is a political decision
is that right and against what metrics
will you make that decision well
I'll ask Sarah if she wants to come in
on this as well the one thing I would
say is that if you look at what other
jurisdictions under countries have done
they have looked to see what has
happened in terms of infection rates
they've looked to see you know how you
know those particular issues are moving
before they've made those decisions as I
said you know we will continue to look
at those five tests we will continue to
look at our and those from from our
perspective will be key determinants
Sarah so I've been privileged to work
quite closely with colleagues and public
health Englanders they're developing the
guidance and looking at these kind of
issues and talking indeed to my own
chief scientific adviser and I think
it's really very much as Minister Sharma
said there what what you need to take
into account the science is very clear
that where somebody has a covert
infection they the chance of them
passing that on at 2 meters distance
from other people is significantly less
than say one and a half or one meter so
it requires a view both of the the
chance of the infection being passed on
but also the prevalence in society
because that that sort of mix of how
many people in the population have got
this illness combined with what's a safe
distance gives you the probability of
something being passed on and it's it's
that complicated sort of series of
considerations that will cause the the
scientists to give advice to government
about the time when it's it's safe to
make a shift if I if I may just add one
other point on this Frances the fact
that if you look at the workplace
guidance that we've put out we we
address the whole issue around 2 metres
and distance and of course we also say
that it is safer to work side by side
than it is you know facing each other
and there's a range of these other
measures that we have recommended in our
guidelines in terms of safer working so
do you have a follow-up
can we have kind of restaurants right
you eat side-by-side I mean is that the
sort of thing that you can do it and is
there a specific infection level below
which the probability is now except
I mean there must be a against since fax
some my calculation can be made you must
already know what an infection rate
needs to get down to before you can
unlock yeah well I think in terms of the
the guidance of how people conduct
themselves in in restaurants and pubs
now that is something that we will
publish and once it's published a very
happy to sort of come back and and and
go through that with you in terms of
that the issue around the to me to rule
I just want to say once again I think
we're going to keep this under review
and only when it is safe at will it
change thank you very much now the next
question is from Joe Mays at Bloomberg
Joe business secretary and in light of
the pandemic many of you all
conservative colleagues are worried
about the extent of China's involvement
in critical infrastructure including
telecoms and nuclear power and how that
involvement might grow so well the
government's national security and
investment bill addressed their concerns
and do you promise to introduce that
legislation before the summer recess
well we we of course have the Enterprise
Act currently that we can draw draw upon
in terms of calling in in motion
acquisitions we are committed to the
NS&I bill that have set out in the
Queen's Speech I'm not going to give you
a sort of timetable on any of that but
all I would say is that we're actually
committed to bring that in will you make
it harder for Chinese companies to
invest in key UK assets well look I mean
I said what I'm not going to do is a
preempt what may or may not be in a
forthcoming bill what I would say to you
is that I think it's important that we
protect our critical assets that is what
we do through the Enterprise Act
currently and of course we would look to
see through the the forthcoming bill
when it comes through how we might
improve upon that thank you very much
for that Joe the last question is from
Laura at the Sunderland echo Laura first
question is
city based city our rates being
calculated and will those be used to
determine any local lockdowns and will
they be published at all and secondly as
businesses and local governments look
towards economic recovery what sort of
support packages could places like
Sunderland that's first high levels of
deprivation and have experienced high
infection rates a large number of deaths
and a big leap in unemployment
what sort of packages can they expect to
see from central government yeah thank
you very much for that question Laura so
the first thing I'd say is that we have
tests and strace up and running we've
got the joint biosecurity Centre which
will help to contribute in terms of
identifying any local areas where there
are flare-ups and of course we've
already able to do that you will see the
action that we have taken in in
weston-super-mare so but right now or
given where the our rate is we are
taking a countrywide approach a national
approach to this and we will continue to
do that until much more detailed
information is available and in terms of
support packages you know as in as in
Sunderland as in elsewhere we have
provided support in terms of bounce back
loans over 21 billion pounds has now
been approved on that with provided
support in terms of you know almost 9
million people across the country
including people in in Sunderland who
will have been supported through the
furlough scheme and of course their self
employment scheme as well and a range of
other measures that we have put in place
and we will continue to do that and I
said you know I'm starting these these
very detailed conversations with
businesses and academics and business
representative groups to see how we can
actually have a innovative economy
across our country you will know that
one of the the key themes of the general
election and what the Prime Minister is
absolutely keen to make sure we do which
is a level up level up across our
country level up in regions and in
communities and that is what we will do
over the coming years did you have a
follow up yeah just I suppose is part of
this leveling up well that mean that
there will be additional support areas
which have been more out of here
well look I mean I think what I don't
want to do is to preempt anything that
may come from the the Chancellor in the
in the future or the Prime Minister in
the future what I would say to you is
that we are AB C committed in terms of
the leveling up agenda that is
absolutely what we want to make sure
happens and as far as the conversations
that I have over the coming days and
weeks that clearly leveling up is going
to be one of the key themes thank you
very much indeed for that Laura that
brings us to the end of this press
conference thank you all very much for
joining us and as we say we want to make
sure that people continue to stay alert
and stay safe we have now announced that
from Monday we're going to be opening up
further parts of their economy we're
doing this in a gradual way and we will
continue to do that so we continue to
stay safe we meet our five tests and we
keep the r8 down thank you for your help
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News